# hackathon-bioinfo4400-F24
Hackathon for Final
# Disease Chosen: Tay-Sachs Disease
## Task C. Underlying Gene
Tay-Sachs is an inherited genetic disorder that is caused by an absence of the enzyme that breaks down gangliosides in the brain. Buildup of these fatty ganglioside substances becomes toxic in the brain and spinal cord and leads to diminished nerve cell function. Tay-Sachs usually shows phenotypic symptoms 3-6 months after birth and can cause muscle weakening, seizures, vision and hearing loss, and paralysis. There is no cure for this disease but supportive care can be administered to lessen symptoms and improve quality of life. Thus, children diagnosed with Tay-Sachs generally live around five years. The diagnostic criteria for this disease is genetic testing for two copies of the HEXA gene, how early symptoms start (infantile, juvenile, and late onset), a cherry red spot in the eye in infants, and family history. The prognostic criteria for infantile form is not good with only 2-4 years to live. The infantile form is the most severe form of the disease The prognostic criteria for juvenile form is a little more variable with life expectancy to mid-teenage years. The prognostic criteria for late-onset form which has the best prognosis of a normal life expectancy. There are two main frontline treatments: supportive care and symptom management. Supportive care consists of improving day-to-day life, while symptom management consists of anticonvulsant medication, respiratory care, nutritional support through feeding tubes, physical therapy, and medications for pain. In order for it to be a successful treatment it must help relieve symptoms, slow disease progression, improve the quality of life, and improve biomarkers. It is important to note that occasionally frontline therapies fail. If they fail, there are other options that are being researched. These options include stem cell transplantation, substrate reduction therapy (GM2 ganglioside), gene therapy, pharmaceutical chaperone therapy, and combination therapy. There are also new clinical trials happening for different medications and treatments. The most notable organ involved in the expression of Tay-Sachs is the brain and spinal cord. This disease causes progressive damage to neurons in the brain and spinal cord. Tay-Sachs is a recessive disorder with mutations in the HEXA gene located on chromosome 15. The HEXA gene encodes the alpha subunit of the beta-hexosaminidase A enzyme, which breaks down GM2 ganglioside. GM2 ganglioside is a fatty substance that is abundant in nerve cells. So, whenever this is mutation, it leads to neurodegeneration. 

## Task D. Building a Protein (Cytoscape file)
A PPI is a model that represents the physical interactions between proteins. This can include direct or indirect interactions. This means when proteins are working together. A gene co-expression network, on the other hand, is a network that shows similar expression patterns across different conditions or samples. This has more to do with the expression of the genes than the genes themselves, and does not imply physical interaction between gene products. 
Proteins interacting with a seed protein can be found by searching a database. Using a seed protein’s name, gene symbol or accession number in the search bar can find proteins. IntAct can be accessed via Cytoscape by installing IntAct importing it through Cytoscape, and then searching for the protein as noted above. 
A PPI network can be visualized and analyzed by importing a file, either locally or from a database, and analyzing it by using the tools, network analyzer, network analysis, analyze network and similar tools on a program. An example is doing this exact process through Cytoscape. A network can be determined to be scale-free by running a network analyzer, looking at the “Degree Distribution” plot, and analyzing the goodness of fit of data and the R-squared. 
Pathway and disease enrichment for genes can be found through functional enrichment analysis tools. As an example, on ToppFun, identifiers such as gene symbols, Ensembl IDs, or Entrez Gene IDs can be used to search for genes through the “Input Genes” box. Analysis options such such as Pathway or Disease can be selected, and additional parameters can be adjusted as needed. After these steps, the analysis can be run and interpreted. Important values to analyze are the “Pathway” or “Disease” table, the “P-value,” “Genes from Input,” “Q-value FDR B&H,” etc. 
## Task E. Find tissue-specific
An eQTL (expression Quantitative Trait Locus) is a genomic region (a locus) containing a DNA variation that influences the expression levels of one or more genes. In simpler terms, an eQTL is a genetic variant that affects how much a particular gene is expressed (how much RNA or protein is produced from that gene).

In the context of the human organism, eQTLs play a critical role in understanding the relationship between genetic variations and biological processes, including the development of diseases and traits.


## Task F: Hypothesis
## Task G: Report
